Genome annotation: funannotate + repeatmasker tutorials (#2985)
galaxyproject/training-material: topics/genome-annotation/tutorials/funannotate/tutorial.md

Funannotate provides two little tools to help us. Let's run the two tools, one after the other.

The first one (**Funannotate assembly clean**) compares all the sequences between them, and removes the shorter ones that are already included in longer ones. This is to reduce unexpected redundancy in the genome. This step is recommended only for haploid genomes (we know our organism is haploid). This first tool also removes any suspicious sequence (like sequences made only of 1 or 2 letters, instead of the 5 expected (ATGCN).

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on
>
> 1. {% tool [Funannotate assembly clean](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/iuc/funannotate_clean/funannotate_clean/1.8.9+galaxy2) %} with the following parameters:
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Assembly to clean"*: `genome_masked.fasta` (Input dataset)
>
{: .hands_on}

The second tool will ensure that our fasta file is sorted, based on the length of the contigs (the longest ones first). It will also rename contigs to make sure the name are standard (they will all begin with `scaffold_`, then a number).

> > ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on

Reviewer: what about merging these two hands ons into one? And maybe giving it a better title, `Hands-on: Polish the assembly` or so?

> ### {% icon comment %} Comments
>
> This step will take a bit of time to run. While it runs, we can already schedule the following functional annotation steps. Galaxy will run them automatically as soon as the structural annotation is ready.
{: .comment}

Let's have a closer look at the output of our annotation. First display the `stats` dataset: the first par of the file contains some information on how funannotate was launched. If you go to the bottom, you'll find a few interesting numbers in the `annotation` section:

- the total number of genes and mRNA
- the average length of genes, exons, proteins
- the number of single/multiple exon transcripts

These number alone are interesting, but not fully informative on the quality of the annotation. For example, for the number of genes, you want a 'good' number based on what you expect for this species (a too big number can mean that genes are fragmented, and a too small number can mean that some genes were not annotated at all). These numbers can help when comparing an annotation with other ones performed with other parameters or tools.

To get a better picture of the quality of the result, we will run BUSCO in the next step.

> Before moving on, have a quick look at the `tbl2asn error summary report` output: it lists a few potential problems that were identified by Funannotate in the results it generated. For example, Funannotate can tell you when it predicted genes that contain very short exons, or that use a rare splice site sequence. You can have a detailed list of identifid potential problems in the `tbl2asn genome validation report` dataset. It does not mean that each listed gene is wrong, but it means that you might want to give a closer look at these ones. If you have time to anually check each gene, Apollo can help you in doing this, see the note in the conclusion for this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before moving on, have a quick look at the `tbl2asn error summary report` output: it lists a few potential problems that were identified by Funannotate in the results it generated. For example, Funannotate can tell you when it predicted genes that contain very short exons, or that use a rare splice site sequence. You can have a detailed list of identified potential problems in the `tbl2asn genome validation report` dataset. It does not mean that each listed gene is wrong, but it means that you might want to give a closer look at these ones. If you have time to manually check each gene, Apollo can help you in doing this, see the note in the conclusion for this.
```

>    - *"Output format"*: `Tab-separated values format (TSV)` and `XML`
>    - *"Use applications with restricted license, only for non-commercial use?"*: `Yes` (set it to `No` if you run InterProScan for commercial use)
>
{: .hands_on}

> ### {% icon comment %} Comments
>
> Due to bugs in InterProScan, `PROSITE Profiles`, `PROSITE Pattern` and `SUPERFAMILY` don't work with the current version of InterProScan. We disable it for this tutorial, and hopefully it should be possible to use them in future versions of InterProScan.
>
> To speed up the processing by InterProScan during this tutorial, you can also disable `Pfam` and `PANTHER` applications. When analysing real data, it is adviced to keep them enabled.
>
> When some applications are disabled, you will of course miss the corresponding results in the output of **InterProScan**.
{: .comment}

The output of this tool is both a tabular file and an XML file. Both contain the same information, but the tabular one is more readable for a Human: each line represents a gene from our annotation, with the different domains and motifs that were found by InterProScan.

> Display the TSV file and explore which kind of results were found by InterProScan.

Reviewer: I guess this was an author instruction? It would be nice to have some examples here for sure!

The XML file will be used in the next step.

# Submission to NCBI

If you plan to submit the final genome sequence and annotation to NCBI, there are a few steps to follow.

> In this tutorial we will not perform a real submission, but here's a description of the main steps, and how Funannotate can help you in this process. NCBI provides a complete documentation for [genome and annotation submission](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/genomesubmit/).

Reviewer: maybe this [could use a warning box](https://training.galaxyproject.org/training-material/topics/contributing/tutorials/create-new-tutorial-content/tutorial.html#warning-box), just in case, to make it a bit clearer that you should not do this.

 "Please do not submit this genome to NCBI"

- First, you should have created a BioProject and a BioSample [on the NCBI portal](https://submit.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/subs/bioproject/), corresponding to your scientific project, and the sample(s) you have sequenced
- The raw reads used for the assembly, and the RNASeq ones should be deposited on SRA, and taggued with the BioProject and BioSample ids

> - Ideally you should start submitting the assembly *before* performing the annotation. The reason is simple: NCBI performs some validation on the genome sequence before accepting it into GenBank. It means that you may be forced to make modifications to the genome sequence (e.g. remove contigs, split contigs where you have adapter contamination, etc). You will save time and trouble doing the annotation on a fully validated and freezed genome sequence.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Ideally you should start submitting the assembly *before* performing the annotation. The reason is simple: NCBI performs some validation on the genome sequence before accepting it into GenBank. It means that you may be forced to make modifications to the genome sequence (e.g. remove contigs, split contigs where you have adapter contamination, etc). You will save time and trouble doing the annotation on a fully validated and frozen genome sequence.
```

>
{: .hands_on}

This tool produces several output dataset, in particular:

- The full structural and functional annotation in Genbank and GFF3 format
- NCBI tbl and sqn (`NCBI Sequin genome`) formats: these files can be used for submission to NCBI
- The CDS, transcript and protein sequences of all the genes predicted by Funannotate
- Some statistics and reports

If you display the GFF3 output, you will notice that the functional information, including gene names, is now stored in this file.

# Visualisation with a genome browser

With Galaxy, you can visualize the annotation you have generated using JBrowse. This allows you to navigate along the chromosomes of the genome and see the structure of each predicted gene. We also add an RNASeq track, using the BAM file created with **RNA STAR** {% icon tool %}.

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on
>
> 1. {% tool [JBrowse](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/iuc/jbrowse/jbrowse/1.16.11+galaxy1) %} with the following parameters:
>    - *"Reference genome to display"*: `Use a genome from history`
>        - {% icon param-file %} *"Select the reference genome"*: `genome` (output of **Sort assembly** {% icon tool %})
>    - In *"Track Group"*:

> >        - {% icon param-repeat %} *"Insert Track Group"*

Reviewer: are there any interproscan tracks that would be interesting here?

Author: Not really, you can get a gff3, but the coordinates are on each protein sequences instead of the genome. There could be some conversion maybe (but too late for next week ahah)

Reviewer: https://usegalaxy.eu/root?tool_id=toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/iuc/gff3_rebase/gff3.rebase/1.2 I don't remember writing that very well, but apparently even a checkbox for 'interpro specific modifications'. (But yeah no worries, we can merge as is and file that for later.

Author: :+1: writing it in my todo list for later!
